# Build Your Own Netty - Move to NIO

> This article is originally posted on [@kezhenxu94](https://github.com/kezhenxu94)'s GitHub repository;

In [the previous post](2.%20Build%20Your%20Own%20Netty%20-%20Move%20to%20NIO.md), we've implemented an
Echo Server by the Blocking I/O (BIO) library and discussed some of the disadvantages of BIO:

0. Server thread cannot do anything but wait when accepting new connections.
0. Clients must wait in queue to be served, **OR** tens of thousands of threads must be created in high
concurrency situation using one-client-one-thread model.
0. Switching thread contexts may be expensive under high concurrency situation.

In this post, we will introduce the Non-blocking I/O library (NIO for short) and use it to rewrite
our Echo Server to resolve the problems that is inevitable in BIO implementation.

## Non-blocking I/O

NIO is a new library introduced since Java 1.4, it was also called New I/O before but since it's not
**new** any longer, it's usually considered as **Non-blocking I/O** later.

## How Does It Work

We are going to rewrite the Echo Server with NIO in this post to resolve the problems listed above,
but before that, let's take a look at how NIO library manages to resolve them.

In the BIO implementation of Echo Server, `serverSocket.accept();` blocks the server thread until
there is connection coming in, so how does NIO solve this? `Selector` does the trick!

```text
+-------+ +-------+ +-------+
|Channel| |Channel| |Channel| ...
+---+---+ +---+---+ +---+---+
    |         |         |
    |         |         |
    |         |         |
    +---------+---------+
              |
              | Register
              v
          +---+----+
          |Selector|
          +---+----+
              |
              |
    +---------+---------+
    |         |         |
  +-+-+     +-+-+     +-+-+
  |Key|     |Key|     |Key| ...
  +---+     +---+     +---+

  ------------------------>

       Iterate Over Keys

           +------+
           |Thread|
           +------+
```

> The flow above shows how `Selector` helps to free the server thread from blocking when waiting new
connection. 

It's perfectly right that the `Selector` works like a multiplexer:

0. First of all, we register a `Channel` to the `Selector` for interested events(read, write, accept),
returning a `Key` representing this registry.
0. When our interested events happened(e.g. `Channel` is able to read, write or new connection can
be accepted), the `Selector` changes the `Key`s' state.
0. We iterate over the `Key`s to find out `Channel`s that are ready for our operations.

```java
public class EchoServer {
  public void start() throws Exception {
    try (final ServerSocketChannel serverSocketChannel = ServerSocketChannel.open()) {
      final Selector selector = Selector.open();

      serverSocketChannel.bind(new InetSocketAddress(InetAddress.getLocalHost(), 8080));
      serverSocketChannel.configureBlocking(false);
      serverSocketChannel.register(selector, SelectionKey.OP_ACCEPT);

      while (true) {
        if (selector.select(1000L) == 0) {
          // no connection yet, do some other staff
          continue;
        }
        // handle the selected keys (selector.selectedKeys())
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Here are some important notes that are different from the BIO implementation:

0. To make it possible for the `ServerSocket` to register to the `Selector`, `ServerSocketChannel`
must be used instead of `ServerSocket`. Static method `ServerSocketChannel.open()` creates one for us.
0. Though `ServerSocketChannel` can be registered to a `Selector`, it works in blocking(synchronous)
mode by default as `ServerSocket` does, in order to make it work in asynchronous mode, the method
`serverSocketChannel.configureBlocking(false)` must be called before registering to the `Selector`,
otherwise the exception `java.nio.channels.IllegalBlockingModeException` would be thrown.
0. `serverSocketChannel.register(selector, SelectionKey.OP_ACCEPT);` registers our server socket channel
to the selector and tells it that this channel is interested in accepting new connection(s) (`SelectionKey.OP_ACCEPT`).

Here comes the key reason why the server thread does not need to block: `selector.select(1000L)` tries
to select out those `Key`s that are ready for our operations, and it will **return the number of channels
immediately if there's any**, or simply block for `1000`ms if there's no available channel, what's more,
the blocking time `1000`ms is configurable, giving us a chance to orchestrate the selection and other tasks,
which is well optimized in Netty project; then we check the returned number to decide whether
perform the **READ**, **WRITE**, **ACCEPT** operations or do other staff.

So far so good, the server thread don't need to block any more, the first problem is solved. How about
the other 2 problems? Can we handle the clients' connection without creating too many threads?

The reason why we need to create so many threads is that the server thread cannot process so many clients
fast enough, and the reason why the process is slow is that the process often includes many read/write
operations, which are again **blocking** operations. So we're going to use the NIO library again to
make the client socket non-blocking:

```java
public class EchoServer {
  public void start() throws Exception {
    // .....
    while (true) {
      if (selector.select(1000L) == 0) {
        continue;
      }
      for (final Iterator<SelectionKey> iterator = selector.selectedKeys().iterator(); iterator.hasNext(); iterator.remove()) {
        final SelectionKey key = iterator.next();
        if (key.isAcceptable()) {
          final ServerSocketChannel server = (ServerSocketChannel) key.channel();
          final SocketChannel client = server.accept();
          client.configureBlocking(false);
          client.register(selector, SelectionKey.OP_READ | SelectionKey.OP_WRITE, ByteBuffer.allocate(1024));
          LOGGER.info("client connected: " + client);
        }
        if (key.isReadable()) {
          readData(key);
        }
        if (key.isWritable()) {
          writeData(key);
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
``` 

The method `accept()` of `ServerSocketChannel` returns another `SocketChannel` that can be registered
to a `Selector` too, so we configure it to work in non-blocking mode and register it back to the `Selector`
again, one thing worth noting is that the interested events of this channel(client channel) is no longer
`SelectionKey.OP_ACCEPT`, it's `SelectionKey.OP_READ` and `SelectionKey.OP_WRITE` instead, meaning that
we are interested in the readability/writability of the client connection.

In this way, we put all the I/O operations from/to all the client connections into one thread, to avoid
creating too many threads, and of course there is no cost to switch thread context among tens of thousands of threads.

## Summarize

In this article, we rewrote the Echo Server by using the NIO (Non-blocking I/O) library. The `Selector`
plays an important role in multiplexing the sockets. By multiplexing, the server thread can do other
staff while waiting for new connections and handling client connections.

Putting all I/O operations into one thread is another important idea that helps to resolve the problems,
and it's also adopted in the Netty's thread model, understanding this will help a lot in the future
study of Netty's source code.

In the next post, we'll learn a design pattern that Netty uses, [Reactor Pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactor_pattern),
and rewrote the Echo Server using this design pattern as well as the NIO library we learnt in this post.
